---
layout: project
title: Digital Justice
tags:
- Manan Ahmed
- Alex Gil
- Miguel Paz
- Daniel Rojas
- Ashley Sayed
- Dennis Yi Tenen
category: minimal-computing
type: workshop
published: true
issue: 15
updates:

- date: 10/15
  type: update
  text: "Welcome [Miguel Paz](http://www.icfj.org/about/profiles/miguel-paz)
and [Daniel
Rojas](http://www.elespectador.com/opinion/daniel-emilio-rojas-castro)"

- date: 10/15
  type: update
  text: "Added [planning
document](https://hackpad.com/Digital-Justice-Santiago-Chile-3odlGGxjZ4Y)."

- date: 10/15
  type: update
  text: "Welcome to [Ashley Sayed](http://www.ashleyrahimisyed.com/),
Community Coordinator (Oct, 2015)."

- date: 05/15
  type: grant
  text: "The pilot project in Mumbai, India has been funded with generous
support from the President's Global Innovation Fund, in the amount of
$20,000."

---

### Digital Justice: Public Discourse, Censorship, and the Technologies of Dissent

Responding to President Bollinger's call to expand the campus conversation
about Equal Justice, this proposal, *Digital Justice*, harnesses the emerging
field of "Digital Humanities" towards critically engaging with questions of
digital publics, free speech, censorship and technologies of dissent. We
propose three rounds of workshops at the Global Centers in Mumbai, Amman and
Santiago where local NGOs, artists, and academics can think through the
implication of these global concerns in their specific geographies. These
conversations will lead to a series of publications, lectures, tools, and other
digital artifacts that seek to affect change for digital justice globally. We
will conclude with a symposium at Columbia in the last year of the Project to
summarize and present the research to Columbia community at Morningside and to
think about the long-term impact. We aim to work with the Global Center
Directors in shaping the individual programs and to involve a diverse array of
faculty across the three years of the project.
