---
layout: project
title: Plain Text
category: minimal-computing
type: book
tags:
- Dennis Yi Tenen
sparkle: plain-text-prog.txt
image: control-2.png
issue: 15
---

<sub>I live stream my writing sessions. Follow me at
[livecoding.tv/denten](https://www.livecoding.tv/denten) if you are intrested
in the mechanics of manuscript preparation, Bash, Vim, Git, Markdown, Pandoc,
or Zotero.</sub>

As I write these words, a ceiling-mounted smoke detector in my kitchen emits a
loud noise every three minutes or so. And at every 15 minutes, a pleasant
female voice announces also "low battery." These precautions are stipulated by
US National Fire Alarm Code 72-108 11.6.6 (2013). The clause requiring a
"distinct audible signal before the battery is incapable of operating" is not
only required by law, it is *built into the device*. The device internalizes
legislation in its programming. We obtain the condition where the two meanings
of code---as governance and program instruction---coincide. Code equals code.

I am not at home. But I know the alarm is happening because I receive
notifications of it on another small computational appliance, next to my
laptop. This appliance also contains most of my book library. Despite the
appearances, the electronic book reader-library next to my computer has more in
common with the smoke detector than it does with several paper volumes also
scattered across my desk. Both devices comprise printed circuit boards,
capacitors, silicone chips, and resistors. Both draw electric current. Both
require firmware updates. Both are governed by codes political and
computational. Both are connected to the network and both communicate: with
remote data centers and with each other. And yet, I continue to read electronic
books as if they were familiar, immutable, and passive objects: just books. I
think of them as intimate artifacts---friends even---wholly known to me,
comforting, and benign. The literary device is none of these things. It records
my reading, sleeping, and consumption habits. It comes with a manual and terms
of service. In short, it *governs* reading. At times, it reconfigures itself
dynamically, affecting all content I have delegated to the device: books,
memories, pictures, words, and thoughts.

In the chapters to come, the literary artifact on my desk will come into view
as a computational device. I will insist on our ability to read such devices
with the aim of developing a hermeneutics of computational reading. I will
argue (a) that the material history computing belongs to the history of text
processing as it does to the history of machine control, (b) that the computer,
exemplified by the Turing machine, stands at the root of *simulated
textuality*, and (c) that the simulated sign splits to reside in at least two
distinct locations, screen and storage medium: the first conspicuous but
ephemeral, the second enduring but opaque. The "illusion of the simulated text"
identifies an incongruity between the two sites of reading. The later chapters
of the book will deal with the cultural consequences of that illusion.

### Digital Displacement

*Plain Text* ultimately enacts a reconciliation of vocabularies. It is a
response to a particular situation of a literary scholar encountering the field
of software engineering. For a long stretch of my professional life, these two
areas of activity remained separate. I worked at one and I studied the other.
At the time, I simply did not think that code had anything to do with poetry.
The idea for the book came to me in a moment of realization after I was asked
one of those naive but fundamental questions of the kind that can set research
in motion down a long and winding path. A childhood friend who loves books
asked about the difference between text in print and text on the screen. It was
in that struggle to articulate the difference that I realized that some of my
deepest assumptions about literature relied on the centuries-long stability of
print media. Despite my professional experience as a programmer, I could not
readily explain the mechanisms by which keystrokes turned into pixels, pixels
into letters, and letters into words. I could recount technical detail on some
level, but my knowledge also had huge gaps. It did not amount to a coherent
story. I was, despite my best efforts, surrounded by magical lanterns that cast
shadows of code and poetry.

Initially, at the point of contact, the two selves spoke different languages.
It was and continues to be a disconcerting process by which things dear and
familiar to me, in both worlds, grew strange and unfamiliar, showing themselves
to be sometimes less than and sometimes more than I comfortably expected.
Nothing could be assumed from the start. Field specific jargon, down to the
naive foundations, had to be examined for hidden assumptions that prevented
congruence. With time, I understood that code and poetry have everything to do
with one another.

Lev Manovich once described his massive image panoramas as an artifact of an
alien life in the process of observing the human condition.[^ln-mano] My other
compatriot and mentor Svetlana Boym also considered her estrangement a
methodology, applicable to life and scholarship.[^ln-boym] Defamiliarization
plays an instrumental part of an immigrant's survival mechanism. The digitally
displaced similarly hold on to the discomfort of the encounter with the
machine.  Estrangement---always at the heart of immigrant or queer
poetics---reconciles without seeking wholeness or integration. I dedicate this
book then to queers and immigrants, literal and figurative---spatial, literary,
technological---to those being displaced unwillingly, to those exiled within
and without, to those who understand the need for self-displacement, to those
who transgress purposefully, and to those willing to trespass.

[^ln-mano]:  Manovich, Lev. “Data Science and Digital Art History.” *International Journal for Digital Art History* 0, no. 1 (June 26, 2015).

[^ln-boym]: Boym, Svetlana. “Estrangement as a Lifestyle: Shklovsky and Brodsky.” *Poetics Today* 17, no. 4 (December 1, 1996): 511–30.

[^ln-uni]: The Unicode Consortium. *The Unicode Standard: Worldwide Character Encoding*, Version 1.0, Volume 1. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1990.

[^ln-lacan]: The evanescent absence of life that Lacan mentions as "the sign about which Robinson Crusoe would make no mistake." See Lacan, Jacques. *The Seminar of Jacques Lacan: The Psychoses, 1955-1956.* W. W. Norton & Company, 1997.

[^ln-kt]: Kittler, Friedrich A., Geoffrey Winthrop-Young, and Michael. Wutz. *Gramophone, Film, Typewriter.* Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1999.
